DHVANI: This is a prototype of a phonetic-to-speech engine which can serve as a
back end for speech synthesisers in Indian Languages, in conjunction
with a laguage-specific text-to-phonetics module (modules for hindi and
kannada will soon be ready). This speech engine has not made any attempt
to do prosody on the output. It simply concatenates basic sound units
at pitch periods and plays them out. Adding prosody is a task for the future.


Instructions on how to use this software follow. Please let the
author know your comments on the software and of any improvements that
you would like to suggest.



Ramesh Hariharan 
ramesh@csa.iisc.ernet.in
Dec 2000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
This document describes:


1. The phonetic specification of the input.
2. The structure of the sound database
3. How to run the program direct-synth.c in the simputer/ directory.


The Phonetic Description
------------------------
The phonetic description is syllable based. Eight kinds of
sounds are allowed (C stands for consonant, V for Vowel, H for a half 
consonant). The text to be spoken out must be expressed
in terms of  these eight types of sound units.

V:  a plain vowel

CV: a consonant followed by a vowel

VC: a vowel followed by a consonant 

CVC: a consonant followed by a vowel followed by a consonant

HCV: a half consonant, followed by a CV

HCVC:  a half consonant, followed by a CVC

0C: a consonant alone

G[0-9]*: a silence gap of the specified length (typical gaps
         between words would be between G1500 and G3000 depending
         upon the speed required; max allowed is G15000; larger
         gaps can be given by repeating G15000 as many times as 
         required)


Before giving examples of the above, we need to enumerate the
consonants and vowels we allow.

Vowels
------
vowels allowed are:

1  a     as is pun
2  aa    as in the hindi word saal (meaning year) 
3  i     as in pin
4  ii    as in keen
5  u     as in pull
6  uu    as in pool
7  e     as in met
8  ee    as in mate
9  ae    as in mat
10 ai    as in height
11 o     as in the tamil word ponni (meaning gold) 
12 oo    as in court
13 au    as in call
14 ow    as in cow
15 tamil-u :  as in the tamil aanddu (meaning year)

The phonetic description uses the numbers 1-15 instead 
of the pnemonics given above.


Consonants
----------
 k kh g gh 
 ch chh j jh 
 t th d dh n 
 tt tth dd ddh nna 
 p f b bh m y r l ll v sh s h 
 zh z an

 Most of the above are self-explanatory for those who know
 an Indian language. The only ones which may need explanation
 are 

 ll as in the tamil word vellam (meaning water, not jaggery)
 zh as in the tamil word vazhi (meaning way)
 z  as in the urdu work roz (meaning daily)
 an as in the hindi kahaan (meaning where)

 These consonants are numbered 1..34. the phonetic
 description however uses the pnemonics above. Within
 the program and in the database nomenclature, 
 the numbers are used.


Examples
--------

khana (food in hindi)              kh2 n2       (CV CV)
maun  (silence in hindi)           m13n         (CVC)
kahaan (where in hindi)            k1 h2an      (CV CVC)
pratibha (talent in hindi)         pHr1 t3 bh2  (HCV CV CV)
sankalp (resolution in hindi)      s1n k1l 0p   (CVC CVC 0C)
chandramaa (the moon in hindi)     ch1n dHr1 m2 (CVC HCV CV)
praan   (life in hindi)            pHr2n        (HCVC)
mysore  (as pronounced in kannada) m10 s6 r5    (CV CV CV)
rashtr  (nation in hindi)          r2sh 0tt 0r  (CVC 0C 0C)
aadesh  (instruction in hindi)     2 d8sh       (V CHC)
andaaz  (style in urdu)            1n d2z       (VC CVC)
ahimsa  (nonviolence)              1 h3n s2     (V CVC CV)
vazhapazham (banana in tamil)      v2 zh1 p1 zh1m (CV CV CV CVC)
 

A note on Half Characters
-------------------------
Only the following half sounds are allowed.

        ky kr kl kll kv ksh
        khy khr khl khv
        gy gr gl gv gn
        ghy ghr ghv ghn
        chy chr chv 
        jy jv
        ty tr tv 
        thy thr 
        dy dr dv
        dhy dhr dhv
        ny nr nv
        tty ttr ttv
        ddy ddr ddv
        py pr pl pll
        fr fl
        by br bl
        bhy bhr bhl
        my mr 
        vy vr vl


If you want to use a half sound which is not in 
this list, you must use 0C instead. For example,

srushtti  would be 0s r5sh tt3
hrithik   would be 0h r3 t3k

but 

dhyan   is   dhHy2n
khyaati is   khHy2 t3 
        

 


------------------------------------------------------------------------
Database Details
-----------------
The database has the following structure. All
sound files stored in the database are gsm compressed
.gsm files (see the gsm directory containing an open source
distribution of the GSM standard by The Communications and 
Operating Systems Research Group (KBS) at the
Technische Universitaet Berlin)
recorded at 16KHz as 16bit signed linear samples. 
The following sound units are stored in the
database (the numbers below have been explained above).



 CV pairs 1..33 * 2 4 6 8 9 10 12 13 14 15
 VC pairs 2 4 6 8 9 10 12 13 14 15 * 1..34
 V 1..14
 33 0C sounds, all consonants except an. 
 Halfs: ky kr kl kll kv ksh
        khy khr khl khv
        gy gr gl gv gn
        ghy ghr ghv ghn
        chy chr chv 
        jy jv
        ty tr tv 
        thy thr 
        dy dr dv
        dhy dhr dhv
        ny nr nv
        tty ttr ttv
        ddy ddr ddv
        py pr pl pll
        fr fl
        by br bl
        bhy bhr bhl
        my mr 
        vy vr vl

The total size of the database is currently around 1MB, though
we can possibly work to get it down to about half the size by
storing only parts of vowels and extending them on the fly.
We are using gsm compression which gives about a factor of 10
compression. There are programs with bettwer compression ratios
available but they do not seem to be open source.


Architecture
------------
CV files are in the cv/ directory within database/
VC files are in the vc/ directory within database/
V files are in the v/ directory within database/
Halfs files are in the halfs/ directory within database/
0C files are in the c/ directory within database/

CV files are named x.y.gsm where x is the consonant
number and y is the vowel number. 
VC  files are named x.y.gsm where x is the vowel number
and y is the consonant number.
V files are named  x.gsm where x is the vowel number.
Halfs files are named  x.y.gsm where x,y are the
two consonants involved.
0C files are named x.gsm where x is the consonant number.

All files other than the 0C files have been pitch marked
and the marks appear in the corresponding .marks files,
one mark per byte as an unsigned char.


In addition to the sound files, there are four files
in database/, namely cvoffsets, vcoffsets, voffsets
and hoffsets, which store various attributes of the
sound files.


cvoffsets
---------
CV fields: start(start of the cv)
           diphst(diphone start position: default halfway to ctov from start)
           ctov(cons to vowel change position)
           longvowlen(length of long vowel, currently not really used)
           shortvowlen(length of short vowel)
           diphend(end of diphone for long vowel, short
                   will be obtained from long)
           diphshortfactor(factor for getting  short diphone from long)
           halfst(place where this cv is cut to connect to previous half)

vcoffsets
---------
VC fields: end(end of vc)
           diphend(diphone end position: default halfway from ctov to end)
           vtoc(vowel to cons change position)
           longvowlen(length of long vowel, currently not really used)
           shortvowlen(length of short vowel)
           diphst(start of diphone for long vowel, short
                   will be obtained from long)

voffsets
--------
V fields: length (length to be played starting from 0)

hoffsets
--------
Halfs fields:start (start of half) 
             end (place where this half is cut and appended to the next sound)




Several of the above files will have xxx attributes meaning that
the synthesis program can set default values for these attributes.


 